# Day 12: Hill Climbing Algorithm 

> You try contacting the Elves using your handheld device, but the river you're following must be too low to get a decent signal.
> 
> You ask the device for a heightmap of the surrounding area (your puzzle input). The heightmap shows the local area from above broken into a grid; the elevation of each square of the grid is given by a single lowercase letter, where a is the lowest elevation, b is the next-lowest, and so on up to the highest elevation, z.

Advent of Code 2022 [Day 12](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/12)


## Ingestion

```q
q)show inp: read0 `:test/12.txt
"Sabqponm"
"abcryxxl"
"accszExk"
"acctuvwj"
"abdefghi"
```

## Part 1

We can use the `vs` keyword to convert indices of a razed matrix into co-ordinate pairs. 

```q
q)show Shp:count each 1 first\inp                                   /map shape
5 8
q)Shp vs/:raze[inp]?"SE"
0 0
2 5
q)`Start`End set'Shp vs/:raze[inp]?"SE";                            /start & end coords
```

We shall need to consult a height map.

```q
Map: ./[;(Start;End);:;0 25] -97+6h$inp                             /height map
```

Our strategy is a breadth-first search: start from the end point and with each step identify the unvisited accessible neighbours until they include the start point.
The number of steps taken will be the length of the shortest route.

We can represent the ongoing search as a pair of lists. 
The first is the points visited; the second a subset of it, the points last visited.

```q
Is: 2 1 2#End                                                       /initial state
```

Each step extends the list of visited points.
We mean to iterate until the start point shows up.

```q
adj: (0 1;1 0;0 -1;-1 0)+\:                                         /adjacent points
filter: {y where not[null h] and (-2+Map . x)< h: Map ./:y}
step: {(x,;::)@\:except[;x]distinct raze{filter[x] adj x}each y}.  
```

The `adj` projection returns adjacent points, but some can be inaccessible: either off the map, or failing the height test. 
The `filter` function removes inaccessible points. 
When it has pruned the neighbours of each point last visited, the pruned lists are razed, any duplicates removed, and also any points already visited.

The result is the extended list of visited points, and the points just now visited. 

The [While iterator](https://code.kx.com/q/ref/accumulators/#while) 
keeps taking steps until the starting point has been visited. 
It remains only to count the steps.


```q
-1+count(not Start in last@) step\ Is                               /part 1
```


## Part 2

For Part 2 we need only replace the start point with a list of the points where the map shows an `"a"`.

```q
a: Shp vs/:where raze inp="a"                                       /"a" coords
-1+count(not any a in last@) step\ Is                               /part 2
```


## Observations

The `vs` and `sv` keywords are best known for joining and partitioning lists. 
Less well known is their use for encoding and decoding numbers to different bases. 
For example, a billion seconds as years, days, hours and seconds:

```q
q)1000 365 24 60 60 vs 1000000000
31 259 1 46 40
```

Using the Do form of Scan gets us the shape of the input matrix.

```q
q)count each 1 first\inp
5 8
```

And that shape becomes the base by which we convert indices of the razed matrix into row-column indices. 

The adjacency function can generate invalid indices, but passed to `Map .` they become nulls we can filter out.


## Contributors

* Cillian Reilly
* Stephen Taylor

